---
layout: post
title: What is PLA?
subtitle: Getting down with the first layer.
cover-img: /assets/img/military_3d_printers-t2.jpg
---

Polylactic acid AKA, PLA, is by far the most popular 3D printing material available, and for good reason. 
It’s one of the most inexpensive, a breeze to print with, and comes in hundreds of different colors and blends. 

PLA is one of the easiest materials to print, unconcerned about having exact print settings. 
Temperatures are flexible, warping is minimal, and there are no strong print odors. 
For this exact reason, many people have only ever printed PLA. If you’re just getting into 3D printing, it’s a great place to start.

PLA is also known for its print quality. It has the best detail reproduction of the common 3D printing filaments, 
making it ideal for models where aesthetics are important. Easily taking pigments, 
PLA is also available in all sorts of vibrant colors and blends, as seen above.

<iframe src="https://charts.sharpdesigndigital.com/anell-point_Lines.html" width="800" height="400"></iframe>

# Temperature & Handle
### The best way to get started

As already mentioned, PLA is extremely flexible when it comes to print settings. 
As long as your bed is level, your printer is in good working order, and your settings are in the right ballpark, 
prints should (generally) succeed. We go into the ins and outs of nailing PLA print settings in a separate guide,
but for a quick reference, the following is what your settings should look like. 
(Note: If your printer comes with PLA print profiles, these should already be well-tuned.)

-Nozzle Temperature: 190–220 °C

-Bed Temperature: 0 °C (with blue painter’s tape) or 50–70 °C

-Print Speed: 10–100 mm/s (depending heavily on the printer’s capabilities)

<iframe src="https://charts.sharpdesigndigital.com/anell-chart1.html" width="600" height="400"></iframe>

As with other materials, make sure that your bed is level and clean before starting a print. If your prints aren’t sticking well to the print surface, you may need to dial in more specific first layer settings.

# Conclusion 

Trial and error is the best way to figure out the temperature for both the bed and the hot end. 
If you find that your prints are sloppy, turn the hot end temperature down a little bit.
If your prints are failing or aren’t sticking to the bed, maybe you need to turn the hot end temperature down, and the bed up.

Elephant’s foot can also be a key indicator that your bed is too hot. As long as you stay within the given ranges,
experimenting is the best way to achieve the best PLA print temperature.
